---
layout: post
title:  "1: Block Cipher"
date:   2026-05-20
---

{% include math.html %}

Our first challenge concerns random reversible circuits. Gowers conjectured that random $$n$$-wire, $$m$$-gate reversible circuits compute pseudorandom functions (cite). If the conjecture holds, then we should be able to use random reversible circuits as a block cipher -- where the key is the description of the circuit $$C$$. Then, $$\mathsf{Enc}(C, x) = C(x)$$ and $$\mathsf{Dec}(C, y)=C^{-1}(y)$$.

This challenge is relatively open-ended: we are just looking for feedback on the construction. Suggestions and attacks -- both concrete and theoretical -- would be appreciate. We do not have a specific challenge to solve here.

> This is not about obfuscation! Just about the hardness of random reversible circuits.

## Random Construction

The first construction naively builds a random reversible circuit. If we want to avoid trivial simplifications, one easy improvement forbids adjacent identical gates (which would annihilate each other).

Diehard tests. How many gates needed to look pseudorandom? But blackbox pseudorandomness doesn't tell us much: we want to deal with whitebox.

## Balanced Construction

We build a block cipher in layers. In each layer, exactly one gate will be active per wire. Controls are assigned at uniformly at random. Here's a procedure to generate an $m=k\cdot n$ wire balanced block cipher on $$n$$ wires:

> _Repeat $$k$$ times_.
> 1. Initialize an empty set of gates $$G$$.
> 2. For $$i\in[1, n]$$:
>     1. Sample distinct control wires $$c_0,c_1\overset$\gets[1,n]\setminus\{i\}$$.
>     2. Add gate $$(\mathsf{active}=i, (c_0, c_1))$$ to $$G$$.
> 2. Shuffle the elements of $$G$$ and output the layer.


> Post a plot of the two constructions using my illustrated.

---

Here's an example challenge.

```rust
pub fn we_can() {
  // post code...
  or = algorithms();
}
```

## The challenge

We propose three candidate constructions for a reversible-circuit block cipher:

1. Random reversible circuit. Coupon collector

2. Balanced reversible circuit. Next gate has active pin on the least-popular wire so far.

3. Structured circuit from Claudio/Eduardo old paper

---

Alternate challenge for each circuit:

- Choose $$n$$ wires, $$m$$ gates. maybe $$128\times 2000$$
- given some 64-bit $$y$$, find the smallest $$x$$ ...
- $$F(0^{50} \| x) = (? \| y)$$ for some given 64-bit $$y$$. top bits can be anything.
  - Find any such $$x$$
  - Find the smallest $$x$$. (remove zero restriction tbh) Maximum leading zero.
  - Might be more natural to invert. No $$F^{-1}$$

_How many gates do we need for this to be hard?_ Hard when behaves like a random function. Gowers help here?

Current record:

Demo on a small number of gates. Then challenges on $$2^k$$ gates.
- 128, 256 wires
- 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192 gates
- Balanced & Random
- Same $$y$$.

Draw the challenge circuit.